\chapter{Implementation}\label{implementation}

This chapter describes some used mechanism in more detail. It also
introduces some classes and methods, but it is not supposed to serve as
a detailed and full documentation. The
Doxygen\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doxygen} software has
been used to generate documentation so the complete overview of the code
can be found in the attached
HTML\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML} document. The program
is implemented in the C++ language. This allows the use of standard C
library functions. Also the functionality provided by the C++
STL\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard\_Template\_Library}
is exploited. Some of its containers are used as a base for containers
with synchronized access implemented in the framework. Some of the
functionality from the C++11\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C++}
standard is also used, so the use of the program is limited to computers
with compiler that supports this standard.

\section{Networking}\label{networking}

One of the most important issue is how to handle the networking. The
chosen approach will be described in this section. As it has been said
already, the program uses TCP for any kind of network communication.
This is certainly good option when we want to handle data transfers,
however, it can be considered unnecessarily demanding for simple tasks.
However to preserve the implementation simple, we chose not to use UDP.
At least the advantages of the use of TCP are exploited. To utilize the
possibilities of the operating system, standard socket API is used.
Information about addresses are stored in the \textit{sockaddr\_storage}
structures which are suitable for storing both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.
This approach makes it possible to switch between both the versions
easily. There are also some helper functions to work with address
structures which are generic in the use of an address family. To provide
easy manipulation with addresses, the structure \textit{MyAddr} was
created which groups the related functionality together.

\subsection{Spawning connections}\label{spawning-connections}

The ultimate class to handle the connections is the
\textit{NetworkHandler} class. It provides all the necessary
functionality. Each instance of the program binds to the given listening
port and starts accepting connections. When the connection is accepted,
new thread is spawned to handle the connection. When the program wants
to make the connection, it provides structure referring to a given
neighbor together with the commands to execute. to the
\textit{NetworkHandler} instance. The connection is then spawned and
handled. Here we encounter the topic of commands. Each action consists
of set of commands that implements it. Commands are instances of a given
class. Each command has two parts. When one node initiates the
connection, it provides the vector of commands to be executed. They are
processed in the loop in the following manner: The command's
\textit{execute} method is invoked. It communicates over the network.
Firstly it sends name of the command to be invoked in the peer node. The
peer's thread loops too. First it reads the name of the command and then
it invokes it. In that moment there are command methods running in both
nodes and they can communicate. When they end, the receiving node waits
for another action while the initiating node spawns next command from
the vector, if any is present. Otherwise it ends the connection. This
mechanism is used to handle all the network communication. What happens
in case of problems is described in the section about handling errors.

Incoming connections are always handled asynchronously. Nevertheless,
the outgoing connections may be handled in the synchronous way. In can
be essential sometimes. For example if the node needs to obtain some
potential neighbors because his list is empty, it has to wait until the
action ends, because if it just sent the request and continued, it would
probably find the list still empty.

\subsection{Protocol}\label{protocol}

As it was said, the communication happens thanks to commands. Thread
that handles the incoming connection is provided with respective file
descriptor and address of the communicating node. First data that
appears are considered as the listening port number of the node, so it
can be identified in the neighbors list or added to the list of
potential neighbors. Then the name of the command is sent, which is
represented by the \textit{enum} type. If no error occurs, the
confirmation is send and the appropriate command's method is invoked.
After returning from the method, another command is read. If there are
no data left, the connection is closed. Most important commands are
listed below.

\begin{enumerate}
\item {\large Commands for maintaining}
\begin{itemize}
\item  \textbf{Confirm} - Confirms the potential neighbor, adds the node to the neighbors list.
\item  \textbf{Ask} - Asks the neighbor for list addresses, receives the list and add the addresses to the potential neighbors list.
\item  \textbf{Ping} - Verifies the neighbor is alive, refreshes its status.
\item  \textbf{Cancel} - Cancels the request for particular chunk's encoding.
\item  \textbf{Goodbye} - Notifies the neighbor that the node itself is withdrawing from the network.
\end{itemize}
\item {\large Commands regarding transfers}
\begin{itemize}
\item  \textbf{Distribute} - Sends both the reference and the chunk itself during distribution.
\item  \textbf{Return} - Returns the encoding chunks back, together with the referencing structure, which is update with the data about encoding and transfers.
\item  \textbf{Gather} - Spreads the request of the initiator to obtain more neighbors.
\end{itemize}
\end{enumerate}

\subsection{Transferring the data}\label{transferring-the-data}

First problem every network application has to deal with considers the
byte order. The POSIX sockets API provides set of functions to deal with
it. Namely it's \textit{htons} and \textit{ntohs}, or \textit{htonl} and
\textit{ntohl} respectively. These functions convert the native
representation of short (long) data types to the network byte order. The
framework uses these function.

\subsection*{Base transfer functions}

Each of the following functions has basically two parts, sending and its
receiving counterpart. Integers are stored as the \textit{int64\_t} type
which ensures correct communication even between 32 and 64 bit nodes.
Then they are sent using the mentioned converting functions. When the
string is transfered, first is sent the length of the string, followed
by the appropriate number of characters. Commands are sent as numbers,
wrapper functions are used which converts between the \textit{enum} type
and \textit{int32\_t} explicitly. Sending the structures containing the
addresses is managed by another special function. It converts the
address to strings and sends it in this form, followed by the port
number. This allows to handle both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, the format
is recognized during the reversed conversion.

\subsection*{Transfering files}

The most delicate task is to transfer the files. The file is first
check, and its size is determined. Then it is sent and then the function
repeatedly reads part of the file to buffer and sends it until all file
is processed. The count of sent bytes is compared with the actual file
size in the end. The receiving side accepts the bytes and writes it to
the file continuously, the file size is checked in the end. The data are
first written to a temporary file and after the successful transfer it
is renamed. This mechanism prevents inconsistency of the received files.
Each file is referenced by the
\hyperref[the-transferinfo-structure]{structure}. Among other things
this structure stores counter of unsuccessful sent tries. If the counter
exceeds given limit, the neighbor is treated as invalid and his state is
set to non-free. The file is also checked, if it is not valid for some
reason the whole process has to be aborted because there is no way how
to fix one specific file.

\subsection{Handling errors}\label{handling-errors}

Unfortunately the network environment is quite error prone and all the
action has uncertain results. Moreover, the communication can be
interrupted at any time. Because of this it is important for the network
application to be able to deal with different error situations.

\subsection*{Errors during the connection handling}

Almost all the functions indicates error by the negative return code.
These codes are checked so the error can propagate. If some error
happens during the control communication, the loop handling the
connection simply brakes, so the connection is closed. The commands are
invoked in the try-catch block, so if the data have been corrupted or
the synchronization has been lost, the next invalid command name raises
an exception and the error is handled. The loss of the synchronization
may be detected thanks to the obligatory confirmation of every command.

\subsection*{Other errors}

If an error happens during the file transfer, the receiving side detects
inconsistency thanks to checking of the file size, so the bad file can
be removed. Generally, if any error is encountered during the
communication, the corresponding execute method indicates it by its
return value, so it can be propagated further. The signal handler also
has to be set to cover situations when the connection is destroyed
unexpectedly and the
SIGPIPE\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix\_signal} is
delivered.

\section{Structures' overview}\label{structures-overview}

This section describes two main structures used in the framework. They
common sign is, that they inherit from the Listener class, so they have
to implement the invoke method. This fact makes it possible to use them
as \hyperref[periodic-actions]{periodic listeners}.

\subsection{The TransferInfo
structure}\label{the-transferinfo-structure}

This structure serves for referencing the chunk. It contains flags used
for transfer, addresses (source and destination), information about the
video and path locating the physical position of the file. This field is
important because it makes it possible to reference the file. It is
changed several time during the process; as the state of the chunk
changes, it it located in various directories and it is important to
keep the field actual. The structure also contains information which
help to determine the encoding process as well as statistics describing
the result. These are used to compute and update the quality of the
neighbor. The structure is also equipped with a pair of methods that
transfers it over the network, which simplifies its usage. Periodic
invocation decreases the timer. It is used when the referenced chunk is
waiting for return. For the first time the timer reaches zero the
neighbor is checked, if it is alive. If yes, the timer is send one more
time. If the neighbor doesn't respond or the timer reaches zero for the
second time, the chunks is resent.

\subsection{The NeighborInfo
structure}\label{the-neighborinfo-structure}

Instances of this structure are kept in the
\hyperref[neighborstorage]{NeighborStorage class}. They represent the
neighbor, that is its address and listening port. It also keeps the
information about quality of the neighbor. The time from last check is
stored too. Periodic invocation causes the timer to decrease and
possibly contact the neighbor to refresh the state.

\section{Important classes}\label{important-classes}

\subsection{The NeighborStorage class}\label{the-neighborstorage-class}

It is class used for storing the \textit{NeighborInfo} structures. It
provides several methods to maintain neighbors list while preserving
synchronization. This is crucial, because the information about neighbor
can change any time but it's desirable to keep our knowledge consistent.
The class has one instance and helps to keep the information about
neighbor at one place, so the manipulation can be controlled.

\subsection{The NetworkHandler class}\label{the-networkhandler-class}

This class is used to handle all the networking issues. It provides
functionality to spawn the connections or contact neighbors. It also
hold the list of potential neighbors. This list differs from the
neighbors list, because besides address and port, which are necessary,
no further info is stored about potential neighbors. Also, most of the
other classes have a notion about this list. When the lack of neighbors
appears, simply the function \textit{obtainNeighbors} is invoked, which
uses the list internally. This class also handles adding of the new
neighbors.

\subsection{The Data class}\label{the-data-class}

It is a singleton class which helps to keep all the data at one place
while accessible from anywhere in the program. It holds the instances of
the \textit{NeighborStorage}, \textit{State} and all the
\hyperref[queues]{queues} used during the transfer and the encoding
process.

There are more significant classes such as TaskHandler and
WindowPrinter, which will be discussed in the corresponding sections.

\section{Periodic actions}\label{periodic-actions}

The framework uses a mechanism which invokes some actions periodically.
Pros and cons of this approach are described in the respective sections,
namely
\hyperref[problems-alternatives-and-possible-improvements]{the alternatives}.
To implement this mechanism, separate thread runs that loops and once
after each time quantum it invokes methods of structures that inherits
from the \textit{Listener} abstract class and are stored in the special
queue. The time quantum is defined as a constant, so all timers actually
express count of the quanta left. Obvious disadvantage of this approach
is busy waiting that is used in the loop. Alternative approach could use
a signal handler and setting an alarm. However, this could lead to not
necessary asynchronous interrupts. Since the mutexes are used to avoid
race conditions, a problem could occur if the signal interrupted some
method holding a ``bad'' mutex.

\section{Queues}\label{queues}

As it is described in the corresponding
\hyperref[distribution-of-chunks]{section}, the references to chunks are
stored in different queues, depending on the state in which they are.
Since the whole process is non-deterministic, different conditions may
occur and more than one thread could need to work with the queue at one
moment. This means, that some way of synchronization has to be provided.
Because of this, the textit\{SynchronizedQueue\} has been created.
Basically it provides usual functionality that could be requested from
the queue, but ensures avoiding race conditions because only one thread
at a time can access the underlying data. This is implemented by the use
of textit\{mutex\}. The \textit{pop} method also uses the conditional
variable, so if there are no data that can be popped at the moment of
invocation it blocks and waits for a signal.

\section{Working with input and
output}\label{working-with-input-and-output}

All the file operations are customized for use on the UNIX operating
system. Nevertheless, there is possibility to implement respective
functions to work on different operating systems easily.

\subsection*{File operations}

Each chunk is stored in a separate file. For this reason several
functions were implemented to allow easier work with the file system.
These include functions for manipulation with the filenames, controlling
files and working with directories. Also there is a generic function
which spawns an external process. This function uses process forking,
spawns the desired process and returns contents of its standard output
and error streams. The function also accepts time after which it kills
the process. The result of the process' run propagates in the function's
return value so the caller can react accordingly. This mechanism is used
when working with video, namely splitting, encoding and joining it.

\subsection*{Working with the video}

The video processing is secured by the \textit{TaskHandler class}. When
it is loaded, some useful properties are obtained thanks to the
\textit{ffprobe} program. To allow easy processing, the output is in the
JSON\footnote{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON} format which is then
parsed with the help of the
\textit{rapidjson}\footnote{https://github.com/miloyip/rapidjson}
library. This library consists of header files only and is distributed
as a part of the source code. It is available under the MIT license
which makes it suitable for usage. These values can then be showed using
the F6 key. More importantly, it is used to compute the number of chunks
that will be created. Note, that the number of chunks can change
slightly during the splitting process. It is caused by the fact, that
the teoretically computed count does not consider the positions of key
frames. So the chunks can actually have different sizes and thus their
count differs. This fact also implies, that each chunks has got slightly
different size. When the process starts, the instance of \textit{ffmpeg}
process is spawned which splits the file. The resulting files are then
stored in the special subdirectory of the working directory. For easy
identification, each process is assigned a unique code determined by the
time stamp. The chunks are then numbered in increasing order. The names
are then stored in the referencing structures that are created at this
point. Then the chunks are distributed as described in the
\hyperref[distribution-of-chunks]{section} about distributing. Each
processing neighbor encodes the chunks using the \textit{ffmpeg} and
then sends it back. The information about the chunk, such as the level
of the encoding quality are stored in the referencing structure. Once
the chunks are collected, first a list of the files to join is created
and then the \textit{ffmpeg} is used once more to join all the chunks to
the output file. The process can be aborted at any time. This action
stops the distribution, cleans the storages and notifies neighbors which
are processing some chunks so they can trash it.

An alternative approach to splitting the file was used during the
development. Firstly the position of every split was computed. Then it
was spawned one process per each chunk. The advantage was, that the
distribution could begin after the first chunk was created and therefore
some time was saved. However this approach turned out to be bad because
of the existence of key frames. It does not allow to split the file at
the arbitrary position so certain shift was observable in the resulting
file.

\subsection*{User interaction}

To provide interaction with the user, the \textit{curses} library is
used. User can provide input from the keyboard. There is set no delay of
the input, so the buffering is disabled. This causes the need to handle
the reading manually but also makes it possible to control the input and
accept the commands immediately. The output is provided using the
\textit{WindowPrinter} class. This class stores the queue of lines of
output and provides functionality to add or remove some. Each record
holds the line together with the information of the style how to print
it. The screen is divided into four parts. Each part spans the whole
width. There is a line displaying available commands at the top. The
biggest portion of the vertical space belongs to two windows. The first
one displays different information about processing, neighbors or file
properties. The second window displays the status changes, notifications
and potentially some debugging messages. The most bottom part shows a
prompt when user input is required.

Because there is usually a lot of threads that can cause the screen to
refresh (this means the particular \textit{WindowPrinter} instance is
updated), it is important to allow only one graphical update at the
moment, otherwise it could cause inconsistency of the graphical data.
This is ensured by a mutex assigned to each \textit{WindowPrinter}
instance.

\section{Synchronization}\label{synchronization}

Because of the nondeterministic nature of the application, it is
necessary to provide some kind of synchronization to ensure data and
information consistency. This problem is solved by the use of mutex and
conditional variable available in the C++ standard library. There are
implementations of queue and map like structures which ensures
serialized access. These classes uses containers from the STL and
synchronization primitives mentioned above. These structures, namely the
\textit{SynchronizedMap} and \textit{SynchronizedQueue} are used to
store chunk references. Operations with the list of neighbors have to be
synchronized too, because for example one thread could be working with
the neighbor's reference while the other finds out that the neighbor is
not responding and wants to remove it from the list.

Another area which have to deal with some race conditions is output
which is displayed on the screen. The output is handled by the
\textit{curses} library which provides practically raw access to the
screen. This means, that if more threads try to work with the screen at
one moment, there is high possibility that they compromise each other
and nonsensical data are displayed at the output. Moreover, this
situation can also possibly result in the segmentation fault. To avoid
these situations, the data that are supposed to appear on the screen are
stored in the respective instances of the \textit{WindowPrinter} and
mutexes are used to allow only one thread to change the content of the
storage or refresh the screen. This approach has a disadvantage, that
each call of the routine that produces some output is possibly blocking

\section{Error detection and
recovery}\label{error-detection-and-recovery}

During the process, various types of errors can occur. Errors connected
with the networking are discussed in the respective
\hyperref[handling-errors]{section}. Here we will describe other errors
that could possibly happen.

\subsection*{Neighbor failure}

If an unexpected failure of some node occurs, the other nodes which has
it in their lists must react. If the communication is interrupted in the
middle, there is no way how the other node can recognize the failure, so
the command execution just fails. However this usually leads to
repetition of the command which registers the failure. Generally the
failure is noted when the try to establish a connection with the given
neighbor fails. This can occur when processing a command, checking a
neighbor or when the timer assigned with some chunk reaches zero. In
every of these situations the same function is used, so the situation is
always treated in the same way. The unresponsive neighbor is removed
from the list. If it has some chunks assigned, i.e.~they has been sent
to it already, they are queued for send to another neighbor. If it has
sent some chunks to be processed by the current node, those chunks are
trashed, because there will not be any use for them, since there is no
neighbor to which they should be returned.

\subsection*{Chunk disappearance}

After the chunk is send to be processed, it is pushed into special queue
where it is checked periodically. If the time is up, the respective
neighbor is checked. If it is responding, the timeout is set once again.
If it does not respond, or the timer reaches zero for the second time,
the chunk is queued for send. Also, in case of the neighbor failure, the
neighbor is removed. This can lead to a situation, when one chunk is
being processed by two different neighbors at the same time. However,
after it returns for the first time, it is put into the dedicated
storage, so if it returns afterwards, it is simply rejected. But
situation should not occur, since when the chunk returns, all assigned
neighbors are notified, so they can cancel the computation. Connected
with this problem is the situation, when one node receives by accident
one chunk more times. The files are checked and what is more, the
transfer uses temporary files so the worst scenario involves wasteful
encoding of the chunk for the second time. For this reason, each node
remembers all the chunks it has processed, so this can be avoided. It is
important to store only the successfully processed ones, because if the
chunk was damaged during the transfer, the initiator could ask for its
repeated encoding. Another issue which has to be solved is how to set
the timeout. When the neighbor is involved for the first time, we have
no information about its performance, so the timeout is set respectively
to the size of the chunk, default multiplication factor is used. When
the neighbor has already quality factor assigned, it is used to compute
the timeout. So the quality coefficient can be seen as time needed to
encode and transfer some unit of data.

\subsection*{Other errors}

Errors can also be encountered during the manipulation with the video.
Because all the video related problems are manipulated by the external
programs, the mechanism is used, which can control the process. The
approximate upper bounds are set for each task that is supposed to be
executed and if the process' execution takes too long, the signal is
send which terminates it, thus the error code is returned.
